
Managing snapshots efficiently can significantly reduce unnecessary costs in AWS. This guide will walk you through a process to automate the deletion of unattached EC2 snapshots using a Lambda function.

Step 1: Create an EC2 Instance

    Launch an EC2 instance:
        Go to the AWS Management Console.
        Navigate to EC2 under Compute services.
        Click on Launch Instance.
        Choose an Amazon Machine Image (AMI).
        Select an instance type.
        Configure instance details, add storage, and configure security groups.
        Review and launch the instance.

    Note the Instance ID and Volume ID for later use.

Step 2: Create a Snapshot of the Instance

    Create a snapshot:
        In the EC2 Dashboard, click on Volumes in the left-hand menu.
        Select the volume attached to your instance.
        Click on Actions and choose Create Snapshot.
        Provide a description for the snapshot and click Create Snapshot.

    Note the Snapshot ID for later use.

Step 3: Create a Lambda Function

    Navigate to the Lambda Console:
        Go to the AWS Lambda Console.

    Create a new Lambda function:
        Click on Create function.
        Choose Author from scratch.
        Enter a name for the function (e.g., DeleteUnusedSnapshots).
        Choose Python 3.x as the runtime.
        Click Create function.

    Add the Python code provided in the repository to the Lambda function

    Deploy the Lambda function:
        Click Deploy to save your changes.

Step 4: Configure Permissions

    Assign Permissions to the Lambda Function:
        Attach an IAM role with the following policy to the Lambda function


{
    "Version": "2012-10-17",
    "Statement": [
        {
            "Effect": "Allow",
            "Action": [
                "ec2:DescribeSnapshots",
                "ec2:DescribeVolumes",
                "ec2:DeleteSnapshot"
            ],
            "Resource": "*"
        }
    ]
}
        
If unsure, you can use AmazonEC2FullAccess which provides broader permissions, though it's not recommended for production due to security best practices.

Step 5: Delete Your EC2 Instance

    Terminate the EC2 instance:
        In the EC2 Dashboard, select your instance.
        Click on Actions and choose Instance State -> Terminate.
        Confirm the termination.

    Verify that the snapshot still exists:
        Go to the Snapshots section in the EC2 Dashboard to see your snapshot.

Step 6: Run the Lambda Function

    Manually test the Lambda function:
        In the Lambda Console, select your function.
        Click Test and create a new test event with any template (the content doesn't matter for this function).
        Click Test again to run the function.

    Verify that the snapshot is deleted:
        Go to the Snapshots section in the EC2 Dashboard to ensure the snapshot has been deleted.
